[Music]
[Applause]
welcome to top cast episode 25 the
multiverse part 2 a reading from chapter
11 of the beginning of infinity by david
deutsch and we're moving slowly through
understanding quantum theory literally
understanding quantum theory applying
realism to quantum theory not denying
that aspects of reality are not real
simply because we find that what the
science is telling us is too astounding
as I've said in previous episodes many
things are astounding or surprising or
amazing that's no reason for rejecting
them at the time when evolution was
first proposed that seemed to be
astonishing but astonishment alone is
not a reason to reject something I'm not
sure who said something to the effect
I'm sure I could google it right now but
I won't bother words the effect that I
cannot refute an incredulous stare and
so when it comes to the multiverse and
the very many people who reject it out
of hand
even professional physicists working in
the area it seems to me that they're
trying to use the argument from
incredulity so they are incredulous that
this thing could possibly be correct now
in the readings today we're going to
learn more about fungibility and the
significance of that to the multiverse
we're also going to hear a description
of the well the solution to some of
these entanglement problems that we
sometimes hear about and how people try
to claim that quantum theory seems to
violate special relativity the
prohibition on faster than the speed of
light travel and David's going to
explain how that cannot be so there's
also a little here about personal
identity as well and as always there's
simply some just amazing explanations of
what's going on so I'm just going to
dive straight into it we got up to the
part where we were comparing what we
were discussing fungibility in the
context of finance and how money of
certain kinds is fungible now we've just
learnt about how money is legally
fungible and what this means is if the
if you owe someone a dollar
they've lent you a dollar a dollar note
or a dollar bill I think it's called an
America here we have dollar coins in
Australia if you owe someone a dollar
they've lent you a dollar you do not
have to return that specific dollar to
that person money is fungible you can
return any other dollar or in any other
form pretty much that you like to 50
cent coins here will do just as well as
a dollar coin here in Australia so money
is legally fungible that's where we're
coming from where we're going to it's
right here where David writes quote it
so happens in some situations money is
not only legally fungible but physically
- and being so familiar it provides a
good model for thinking about
fungibility for example if the balance
in your electronic bank account is $1
and the bank adds a second dollar as a
loyalty bonus and later withdraws a
dollar in charges there is no meaning to
whether the dollar they were drew is the
one that was there originally or the one
they had added or it's composed of a
little of each it is not merely that we
cannot know whether it was the same
dollar or have decided not to care
because of the physics of the situation
there really is no such thing as taking
the original dollar nor such a thing as
taking the one added subsequently
dollars in bank accounts are what may be
called configurational entities they are
States or configurations of objects not
what we usually think of as physical
objects in their own right your bank
balance resides in the state of a
certain information storage device in a
sense you own that state it is illegal
for anyone to alter it without your
consent but you do not own the device
itself or any part of it so in that
sense a dollar is an abstraction indeed
is a piece of abstract knowledge as I
discussed in Chapter four knowledge once
embodied in physical form in a suitable
environment causes itself to remain so
and thus when a physical dollar wears
out and is destroyed by the mint the
abstract dollar causes the mint to
transfer it into electronic form or into
a new instance in paper form it is an
abstract replicator though unusually for
a replicator it causes itself not to
proliferate but rather to be copied into
ledgers and into bank backups of
computer memories
so I'm skipping a bit here because I've
described this section in a previous
episode data talks about the fungibility
of energy and physics so for example if
it takes you 20 joules of energy to ride
to the top of a particular hill and then
you say that you've gained 20 joules of
gravitational potential energy roughly
speaking I'm ignoring things like
friction and the fact that your muscles
aren't efficient and all that sort of
stuff now if you decide to roll your
bike back down you're sitting on the
bike and you're pedaling and you're
rolling down the hill and you get a half
way down then half way down you've lost
ten of those 20 joules of gravitational
potential energy and in theory you if
everything's working perfectly and
there's no friction and all that sort of
stuff as we like to assume in physics
then you've gained 10 joules of kinetic
energy now it doesn't make sense which
of the 20 joules originally that you
gained as gravitational potential energy
which of those 20 will lost as
gravitational potential energy and were
gained as kinetic energy and so this
kind of fungibility is known as
configurator configurational entity and
he also mentions that a configurational
entity also includes particles in the
quantum field quantum field theory is
this idea that particles are excitations
are something more fundamental still the
quantum field and that would probably
require a whole other series of podcasts
not mine more than likely to explain so
that's quantum field theory the the more
fundamental in a sense version of
quantum theory so I will continue
reading after that brief interlude and
David writes quote if the two universes
of our fictional multiverse are
initially fungible our transporter
malfunction can make them acquire
different attributes in the same way
that a banks computer can withdraw one
of two fungible dollars and not the
other from an account containing $2 the
laws of physics could for instance say
that when the transporter malfunctions
then in one of the universes and not the
other
there will be a small voltage surge in
the transported objects the laws being
symmetrical could not possibly specify
which universe the surge will take place
in but precisely because the universes
are initially fungible they do not have
to it is a rather counterintuitive fact
that if objects are merely identical in
the sense of being exact copies and obey
deterministic laws that make no
distinction between them then they can
never become different but fungible
objects which on the face of it are even
more alike Ken this is the first of
those weird properties of fungibility
that liebman's never thought of in which
I consider to be at the heart of the
phenomena of quantum physics so just
pause there this is my reflection I'm
just cast your mind back to the mark
Zehnder interferometer and it contained
that thing called the half-silvered
mirror and if a photon strikes the
half-silvered mirror it's got a 50%
chance of going through being
transmitted through the mirror and a 50%
chance of bouncing off the mirror and in
terms of the multiverse I'm getting it
way ahead of what David is in this
chapter of course but our understanding
of what the physics of that situation is
is that the photon being a multiversal
object contains uncountably infinite
numbers of fungible instances and so
when it strikes the half-silvered mirror
literally 50% of the instances go
through the mirror are transmitted
around 50% bounce off and so this is the
sense in which we can have perfectly
deterministic laws which cause universes
to act differently ok back to the book
David writes quotes here is another
suppose that your account contains a
hundred dollars and you have instructed
your bank to transfer one dollar from
the account to the tax authority on a
specified date in the future so the
bank's computer now contains a
deterministic rule to the to that effect
suppose that you have done this because
the dollar already belongs to the tax
authority say it had mistakenly sent you
a tax refund and has given you a
deadline to repay it since the dollars
in the account are fungible there is no
such thing as which one belongs to the
tax authority and which belong to you
so we now have a situation in which a
collection of entities though fungible
do
all have the same owner everyday
language struggles to describe this
situation each dollar in the account
shares literally all its attributes with
the others yet it is not the case that
all of them have the same owner so could
we say that in this situation they have
no owner that would be misleading
because evidently the tax authority does
iron one of them and you earn the rest
could one say that they all have two
owners perhaps but only because that is
a vague term certainly there is no point
in saying that one cent of each of the
dollars is owned by the tax authority
because that simply runs into the
problem that the sense in iya counter or
fungible - but in any case notice the
problem raised by this diversity within
vulnerability is one of language only it
is a problem of how to describe some
aspects of the situation in words no one
finds the situation itself paradoxical
the computer has been instructed to
execute definite rules and there will
never be any ambiguity in what will
happen as a result diversity within
fungibility is a widespread phenomenon
in the multiverse as I shall explain one
big difference from the case of fungible
money is that in the latter case we
never have to wonder about or predict
what it would be like to be a dollar
that is to say what it would be like to
be fungible and then to become
differentiated many applications of
quantum theory require us to do exactly
that but first I suggested temporarily
visualizing our two universes oddly as
being next to each other in space just
as some science fiction stories refer to
doppelganger universes as being in other
dimensions but now we have to abandon
that image and make them coincide
whatever that extra dimension was
supposed to denote it would make them
non fungible it is not that they
coincide in anything such as an external
space they are not in space an instance
of space is part of each of them that
they coincide means only that they are
not separate in any way it is hard to
imagine perfectly identical things
coinciding for instance as soon as you
imagine just one of them your
imagination has already violated their
fungibility but although imagination may
Bork reason does not now our story can
begin to have a non-trivial plot for
example the
Serg that happens in one of the two
universes when the transporter
malfunctions could cause some of the
neurons in a passenger's brain to
misfire in that universe as a result in
that universe the pattern just spills a
cup of coffee on another passenger as a
result they have a shared experience
with that which they did not have in the
other universe and this leads to romance
just as in sliding doors the voltage
surges need not be malfunctions of the
transporter they could be a regular
effect of the way it works
we accept much larger unpredictable
jolts during other forms of travel such
as flying or prom co-writing let us
imagine that a tiny surge is produced in
one of the universes whenever the
transporter is operated in both but that
it is too small to be noticeable unless
measured with a sensitive voltmeter or
unless it nudges something that happens
to be on the brink of changing but would
recede from the brink of not nudged in
principle a phenomena could appear
unpredictable to observers for one or
more of three reasons the first is that
it is affected by some fundamentally
random in deterministic variable i've
excluded that possibility from our story
because there are no such variables in
real physics the second which is at
least partly responsible for most
everyday unpredictability is that the
factors affecting the phenomena though
deterministic are either unknown or too
complex to take account of this is
especially so when they involve the
creation of knowledge as I discussed in
Chapter 9 the third which had never been
imagined before quantum theory is that
two or more initially fungible instances
of the object become different that is
what those transporter induced jolts
bring and bring about and what makes
their outcome strictly unpredictable
despite being described by deterministic
laws of physics pause there my
reflection yeah yeah this is the thing
that I emphasized the last time as well
and I love that that's just the powerful
way that David Deutsch is able to
explain in just a single sentence the
misconception that so many people have
about this particular point people who
think that determinism must mean
predictability and so I'll just read
that sentence again because it's
brilliantly parsimonious and he writes
that is what does
transporter and juice jobs bring about
and it makes their outcomes
strictly unpredictable despite being
described by deterministic laws of
physics and I'll keep going
these are remarks about unpredictable
phenomena could be expressed without
ever referring explicitly to fungibility
and indeed that is what multiverse
researchers usually do nevertheless as I
have said I believe that fungibility is
essential to the explanation of quantum
randomness and most other quantum
phenomena pause they're just my
reflection there's just a side note as
well quantum randomness when we talk
about quantum randomness what we mean is
that things seem subjectively random and
what subjectively meant random means is
that from your perspective it seems like
what happens is random in certain
situations you flip a coin and one would
say that it's 50% going to end up heads
and 50% tails from your perspective your
subjectivity and everyone else on planet
earth from their subjectivity as well
the outcome is random it could be heads
or it could be tails
that's what subjective randomness is
about no one knows no one could possibly
predict with perfect accuracy and indeed
the randomness that we get from coin
flips or from dice rolls or roulette
wheels and etc etc those kind of random
events by the way probabilistic as well
because we know what the possible
outcomes are okay knowledge won't go
affecting the fact that if you flip a
coin it's 50/50 or you roll a dice it's
1 in 6 for each face if it's a fair dice
and so on ok so when we know what all
the possible outcomes out we can do a
probability legitimately I mentioned
that because of course they're a
illegitimate uses as a probability for
example calculating the likelihood that
civilization will survive over the next
century ok because you don't know the
possible outcomes knowledge creation
will affect that outcome so subjective
randomness is about this idea that we
can't predict the outcomes of certain
events
like rolling dice or even like whether
or not something will go wrong with your
car that kind of thing now in terms of
the multiverse as a whole however
nothing is random there is no objective
randomness nothing truly on the scale of
the multiverse according to the laws of
physics that is truly random because
everything that can physically possibly
happen actually does happen and if you
could possibly get outside of the
multiverse if you're an omnipotent God
looking down you would see that
everything is simply unfolding as the
laws of physics determined nothing was
random in other words nothing violated
the laws of physics quantum theory
doesn't give us randomness in the
objective sense that most people think
just a subjective sense because you
don't occupy all of the universes if you
were some sort of entity that was able
to occupy love the universe of
simultaneously and have a consciousness
that occupied all of the universes
simultaneously then nothing would seem
random to you you would just see the
unfolding of all the possible events and
so you would see when you flip the coin
you know that you would say both heads
and tails which would be a weird thing
to experience I suppose we're getting
into an entity like that in the next
episode I think anyway so look out for
that one I keep I keep promising that by
the way that there's coming up we will
be talking about a test of quantum
theory which is going to be linked to
consciousness but I digress let's go
back to the book David writes all three
of these radically different causes of
unpredictability could in principle feel
exactly the same to observers but in an
explicable world there must be a way of
finding out which of them or which
combination of them is the actual source
of any apparent randomness in nature how
could one find out if that is
fungibility and parallel universes that
are responsible for a given phenomena
okay
pausing there and I'm skipping a quite
substantial part of this chapter just to
remind you this is I it's one of the
longest yes so this chap
has 47 pages substantially greater than
any of the other chapters I think
chapter 3 the spark was the
second-longest at 36 so it's 11 pages
longer than the second longest chapter
if I've counted the pages correctly um
and so I just highlight that for you
because there's no substitute for
reading the book you should buy the book
if you haven't I am skipping a lot of
this chapter in order to explain around
it now the bit that I'm skipping he was
about the prohibition on communicating
between universes so remember David's
telling a science fiction story about
these doppelganger people one of whom
spilled some coffee on another now in a
spaceship using a transporter now could
the universes after they differentiate
communicate and he explains all the
reasons all the things that could happen
if they could but they can't and so I'm
going to skip that part and I would urge
you to read that part read the entire
chapter I suppose but yes I am just
highlighting the fact I'm skipping
significant parts of the book as I go
through these chapters ok so David
writes since there is no you into
universe communication in real quantum
physics we shall not allow it in our
story and so that specific route to
explicable 'ti is not open the history
in which our crew members are married
and the one in which they still hardly
know each other cannot communicate with
each other or observe each other
nevertheless as we shall see there are
circumstances in which histories can
still affect each other in ways that do
not amount to communication and the need
to explain those effects provides the
main argument that our own multiverse is
real pause they're just my reflection so
of course the reason why david has made
a point of talking about the prohibition
on inter universe communication is
because if there was into universe
communication then we wouldn't have to
spend 47 pages he wouldn't have to spend
47 pages
and give many talks and other
philosophers and physicists like David
Wallace wouldn't have to write vast
books defending the thesis because we
would all be communicating with these
other universes we would see them
directly you know it would be easier to
convince people of the existence of
these other universes if it was as easy
to communicate with these other
universes as it was to communicate
between cities or nations but the laws
of physics themselves prohibit prevent
inter universe communication and so we
have to be a bit more subtle in the
observations that we interpret in order
to establish that the multiverse is
correct is the way of understanding
quantum theory back to the book after
the universes in our story begin to dear
far inside one starship everything else
in the world exists in pairs of
identical instances we must continue to
imagine those pairs as being fungible
this is necessary because the universes
are not receptacles there is nothing to
them apart from the objects that they
contain if they did have an independent
reality if they did have an independent
reality then each of the objects in such
a pair would have a property of being in
one particular universe and not the
other which would make them non fungible
typically the region in which the
universes are different will then grow
for instance when the couple decide to
marry they send messages to their home
planets announcing this when the
messages arrive the two instances of
each of those those planets become
different previously only the two
instances of this of the starship were
different but soon even before anyone
broadcasts intentionally some of the
information will have leaked out for
instance people in a starship are moving
differently in the two universes as a
result of the marriage decision so light
bounces off them differently and some of
it leaves the starship through portals
marking the two universes making the two
universes slightly different wherever it
goes the same is true of heat radiation
infrared light which leaves the starship
through every point on the hull then
starting with the voltage happening in
only one universe a wave of
differentiation between the universes
spreads in all directions through space
since information traveling in either
universe cannot exceed the speed of
light nor can the wave of
differentiation and since at its
leading-edge it mostly travels at or
near that speed differences in the head
start that some directions have over
others will become an increasingly
smaller proportion of the total distance
traveled and so the further the wave
travels the more nearly spherical
becomes it becomes so I shall call it a
sphere of differentiation pause there
just my reflection so this is one of the
subtle and difficult I guess parts to
really understand so all we've got is a
quantum event happening here in the the
starship the the transport has been used
and it causes a voltage surge in one of
the universes are not the other but
that's our little quantum event a little
voltage surge caused by electrons doing
something or other now that voltage
surge magnifies up to cause in the
universe where it happens but not in the
universe where didn't in the universe
where it happened someone to spill their
coffee okay they got zapped and so they
spilled their coffee and they spilled
the coffee on someone else and so
automatically we've magnified the
quantum event to something larger and
the person upon whom the coffee fill has
then talk to the person who spilt the
coffee and they've developed a romance
and decided to get eventually get
married now
as soon as the coffee gets spilt maybe
the person stands up and so
automatically they're moving differently
in that universe compared to the other
where they're still probably just
sitting beside each other or something
and so because they're moving
differently the light reflecting off
them differently and so to first
approximation what happens is that that
light that's been reflected off them is
going to strike the walls of the
starship in slightly different ways and
could indeed cause the heating of the
starship and slightly different ways and
that heat leaks out is infrared
radiation now there's a a lower limit on
that that we're going to learn about the
the will which goes into photoelectric
effect that which we talked about in a
couple of episodes back if you recall
electric effect Hall's talks about how
there is a lowest possible energy of
light namely the photon and if you don't
exceed that lowest possible energy then
perhaps nothing happens okay that's a
possibility that nothing happens over
time however the fact that people get
married in one universe but not the
other causes the entire universe there
to gradually change but in what sense
other two universe is kind of different
the wall that they differentiate so
initially the only difference is then in
one universe coffee is spilled and the
other coffee is not spilled the
remainder of the entire universes are
perfectly fungible but over time at
approximately the speed of light as
david has said there this wave of
differentiation spreads out from the
coffee spilling incident causing all
sorts of differences but in particular
it has change due to the knowledge
namely if they decide to get married in
one universe then they're going to send
messages to their home planet or
whatever to their families and that's
going to cause big changes what big
changes within the lives of those people
but the rest of the universe might only
subtly change and in fact some in some
areas barely at all but as time goes on
those changes do affect will you know
something the size of the classical
universe but it will take a long time
for that to happen clearly because light
only travels at its 300,000 kilometres
per second and it's going to take some
billions of years to get from one side
of the inside I say from one part of the
universe to another very very distant
part of the universe and so this is how
differentiation happens and it is why
David Wallace called his book the
emergent multiverse because the
multiverse is a theory not simply to
explain small things that are happening
that's a great misconception it's a
theory to explain the differences
between whole universes between
large-scale structures okay
back to the book where david say he kind
of the same thing that i just said there
but better so i'll read that quote even
inside the sphere of differentiation
there are comparatively few differences
between the universes the stars still
shine the planets still have the same
continents even the people who hear of
the wedding and behave differently as a
result retain most of the same data in
their brains and other information
storage devices and they still breathe
the same type of air eat the same type
of food and so on however although it
may seem intuitively reasonable that
news of the marriage leaves most things
unchanged there is a different common
sense intuition that seems to prove that
it must change everything
if only slightly consider what happens
when the news reaches a planet say in
the form of a pulse of photons from a
communication laser even before any
human consequences there is the physical
impact of those photons which one might
expect to impart momentum to every atom
exposed to the beam which will be
written which would be every atom in
something like that half of the surface
of the planet which is facing the beam
those atoms would then vibrate a little
differently affecting the atoms below
through inter atomic forces as each atom
affected others the effect would spread
rapidly through the planet soon every
atom in the planet would have been
affected though most of them by
unimaginably tiny amounts nevertheless
however small such an effect was it
would be enough to break the fungibility
between each atom and its other universe
counterpart hence it would seem that
nothing would be left fungible after the
wave of differentiation had passed these
two opposite intuitions reflect the
ancient dichotomy between the discrete
and the continuous the above argument
that everything in the sphere of
differentiation must become different
depends upon the reality of extremely
small physical changes changes that
would be many orders of magnitude too
small to be measurable the existence of
such changes follows inexorably from the
explanations of classical physics
because in classical physics most
fundamental quantities such as energy
are continuously variable
pause they're just this is just my
reflection okay so just to emphasize
that so there's this thing called the
inverse square law okay and it works for
the intensity of light and it's a
classical law and it says that as you
move away from the source of light lack
of the Sun the intensity of light that
you receive from the Sun usually
measured in something like the number of
watts okay that's the power the number
of joules of energy per second that
you've received from the Sun well that
decreases as the square of the distance
so if you are here at Earth and you're
receiving a certain amount of energy
from the Sun by the way here at the
earth it's something like if I remember
1600 watts per meter squared so if
you've got one meter square
you get 1600 watts approximately I think
above the atmosphere by the way at right
angles to the Sun and under perfect
conditions but if you are twice the
distance away from the Sun then the
square of that is 4
okay so you've doubled the distance so
the intensity is 4 times less than the
1600 watts so it would go down to 400
watts and then if you go still further
away again so you double your distance
again then it's a quarter of that you
now down to 100 watts and so this is
what the inverse square law is which
would say that it doesn't matter how far
away you go from the Sun there will
never come a point where the light
disappears completely or or is unable to
affect you whatsoever because it's just
a continuous beam of light it just gets
more and more dim the furtherance hits
more and more dim the further and
further you get away it never actually
disappears but we already know don't we
that light has made a photon so there
must come a distance where you're not
going to get a continuous stream of
light eventually the light will go out
it will disappear and then it will start
will actually will start to flash at you
and the flashes will become less and
less frequently
and that's what they vote on a theory of
life is all about okay so I'll just go
back and read forward a little bit so
David wrote and writes quote the
existence of such changes follows
inexorably from the explanations of
classical physics because in classical
physics most fundamental quantities such
as energy are continuously variable the
opposing intuition comes from thinking
about the world in terms of information
processing and hence in terms of
discrete variables such as the contents
of people's memories
quantum theory adjudicates this conflict
in favor of the discrete for a typical
physical quantity there is a smallest
possible change that it can undergo in a
given situation for instance there is a
smallest possible amount of energy that
can be transferred from radiation to any
particular atom the atom cannot absorb
any less than that amount which is
called a quantum of energy since this
was the first distinctive feature of
quantum physics to be discovered it gave
its name to the field let us incorporate
it into our fictional physics as well
pause there just my reflection one might
also say it was an unfortunate first
discovery this idea of the quantum
because people now think that quantum
physics is really only about the very
small but of course it's not it's about
everything it's a it's a physical theory
that explains the behavior not only of
small things but of all things to some
extent it's not going to explain why
history happened the way that it did
it's not going to explain whether you
should get married or not it's not going
to explain areas of mathematics and
biology but it is going to explain the
fact that physical reality on even the
largest scales is constituted of many
different universes and that that's the
biggest structure that we know of in
reality is the entire multiverse so far
from being a theory of only they're very
small it also happens to be an
explanation of the very larger structure
that we have ever invoked in science
okay let's keep going David writes hence
it is not the case that all the atoms on
the surface of the planet are changed by
the arrival of the radio message in
reality the typical response of a large
physical object to very small influences
is that most of its atoms remain
strictly unchanged while to obey the
conservation laws a few exhibit a
discrete relatively large change of one
quantum the discreteness of variables
raises questions about motion and change
does it mean that changes happen
instantaneously bate or not which raises
the further question what is the world
like halfway through that change also if
a few atoms are strongly affected by
some influence and the rest are
unaffected what determines which are the
ones to be affected the answer has to do
with fungibility as the reader may guess
and as I shall explain next the effects
of a wave of differentiation usually
diminish rapidly with distance simply
because physical effects in general do
pause there my reflection this is um the
inverse square law thing so I'll skip
past that ah and then he writes so let
me just continue here okay David Rives
even the most violent of quasar Jets
when viewed from a neighboring galaxy
would be little more than an abstract
painting in the sky there is only one
known phenomena which if it ever
occurred would have effects that did not
fall off with distance and that is the
creation of a certain type of knowledge
namely a beginning of infinity indeed
knowledge can aim itself of it at a
target travel vast distances having
scarcely an eerie effect and then
utterly transform the destination that's
absolutely worth reading again because
many people who have become enamored by
this book and who talked about it in
large forums have rightly fixated on
that amazing observation by David
Deutsch
so again he says knowledge can aim
itself at a target travel vast distances
having scarcely any effect and then
utterly transform the destination end
quote so this is this is truly
astounding because it means that
knowledge is very much a kind of
physical force not in the strict sense
of the way physicists talk about what
forces are but a certainly a a quality
of nature force of nature a thing that
exists in the universe that is up there
with things like gravity if you had a
God's eye view of the universe and you
were trying to explain what the things
are that are in that universe causing it
to behave the way that it did and appear
the way that it did you would certainly
sight gravity as being of key importance
why planets spherical why so many
objects in the universe spiracle
approximately speaking stars planets
moons
well because gravity pulls things into
spheres it causes things to take on
spherical shapes and the thing that
stops them from collapsing if gravity is
pulling them in often some kind of other
chemical force pushing outwards in the
case of the earth and and and rocky type
planets it's the the chemical forces
that the electrostatic forces stop the
thing from collapsing any further than
it does so you would invoke these
physical forces to explain the
appearance of the universe but looking
at the surface of the earth you can't
you can't invoke only the physical
forces yeah here's a picture of Sidney
it's beautiful city now the Sydney
Harbor Basin a it's made of sandstone
can't see the sandstone here though
but the harbor is there because it has
slowly eroded away over time through the
sandstone
and that's being washed out into the
ocean the sandstone and forms our lovely
beaches in fact the erosion of the
sandstone below beneath Sydney but the
bridge the Opera House the buildings
they're not natural formations they're a
consequence of knowledge and indeed
knowledge being transmitted from one
place to another yes some of this
knowledge was created here but vast
amounts of it were inherited from Europe
or the United States in the future we're
going to have a moon base or a base on
Mars that will be caused by knowledge
from the earth
aiming itself at that place and
transforming that planet and in the far
distant future when we look at the
galaxy as a whole one would hope that
our galactic scales when we look at
certain features of the galaxy we're
going to see some areas far brighter and
some areas far more dim than galaxies
that are not populated by people that
will simply look different on gross
scales and at finer scales they will
look exceedingly more different we might
be able to roughly predict what planets
on the other side of the galaxy look
like now they're probably going to look
similar to the planets that are here in
our solar system gas giants with pretty
clouds rocky planets that are barren
like Mars or mercury perhaps now and
again we'll get an interesting one like
Earth which has oceans and maybe some
bacteria or something like that more or
less within certain limits we can
probably guess what the planets are
going to look like they're going to be
spherical they're going to in general be
orbiting stars what we can't possibly
predict is what parts of the galaxy will
look like if people get there if there
are places in the universe where there
are people not like us aliens we can't
predict what they're going to be like
we can't predict what life-forms will be
like if they've evolved there as well
some science fiction writers have talked
about the possibility of silicon
life-forms there's good reasons to think
they won't happen
they won't exist but if they did if they
were able to evolve evolution brings
knowledge into reality in such a way
that it can transform it in ways that
are unpredictable but the explanatory
type knowledge it can be taken from one
place like the earth and perhaps an
existent future
aim itself let's say to a planet
orbiting a star a hundred light years
away and utterly transform that planet
and in between us and that place it
might have scarcely any effect as david
says and it will only have an effect the
desired effect at that planet by
transforming you causing the people that
are there or the robots or whatever to
take the resources that are there and
rearrange them to construct new things
new kinds of ways of creating knowledge
their civilizations and so on so that is
a really really profound sentence as
always buried here in the beginning of
infinity which sometimes you can just
skim over without realizing the import
of ok let's go back to the book David
writes quote in our story - if we wanted
the transporter malfunction to have a
significant physical effect at
astronomical distances it would have to
be via knowledge all those torrents are
photons screaming out of the starship
and carrying intentionally or
unintentionally the information about a
wedding will have a noticeable effect on
the distant planet only if someone there
cares about the possibility of such
information enough to set up scientific
instruments that could detect it now as
I have explained our imaginary laws of
physics which say that a voltage surge
happens in one universe but not the
other cannot be deterministic unless the
universes are fungible
so what happens when the transporter is
used again
the universe's are no longer fungible
imagine a second starship of the same
type as the first and far away what
happens if the second starship runs its
transporter immediately after the first
one did one logically possible answer
would be that nothing happens in other
words the laws of physics would say that
once the two universes are different all
transporters just work normally and
never produce a voltage surge again
however that would also provide a way of
communicating faster than light I'll be
at unreliably and only once you set up a
voltmeter in the transporter room and
run the transporter if the voltage
surges you know that the other starship
however far away has not yet run its
transporter because if it had it would
have put a permanent into such surges
everywhere the laws governing the real
multiverse do not allow information to
flow in that way if we want our
fictional laws of physics to be
universal from the inhabitants point of
view the second transporter must do
exactly what the first one did it must
cause a voltage surge in one universe
and not in the other but in that case
something must determine which universe
the second surge will happen in in one
universe but not the other is no longer
a deterministic specification also a
surge must not happen if the transporter
is run only in the other universe that
will constitute inter universe
communication it must depend on both
instances of the transporter being run
simultaneously
even that could allow some into universe
communication as follows in the universe
where a surge has once happened run the
transporter at a pre-arranged time and
observe the voltmeter if no surge
happens then the transporter in the end
of the universe is switched off so we
are at an impasse it is remarkable how
much subtlety there can be in the
apparently straightforward binary
distinction between same and different
or between affected and unaffected in
the real quantum theory to the
prohibitions on inter universe
communication and faster-than-light
communication are closely connected
there is a way I think it is the only
way to meet simultaneously the
requirements that our fictional unit
laws of physics be universal and
deterministic and forbid faster than
light into universe communication more
universes imagine an uncountably
infinite number of them all
initially fungible the transporter
causes previously fungible ones to
become diff
as before but now the relevant law of
physics says the voltage surges happen
in half the universes in which the
transporter is used so after two
starships both run their transporters
then after the two spheres of
differentiation of overlapped there will
be universes of four different kinds
those in which a surge happened only in
the first starship only in the second in
neither and in both in other words the
overlap in the overlap region there are
four different histories each taking
place in one quarter of the universes
pause now my reflection this is the full
narc Zehnder interferometer type thing
where you end up with these four
different possibilities if you've got
two half silvered mirrors because you
get transmission transmission
transmission reflection reflection
transmission reflection reflected so you
get that if you want to know more about
that go back a couple episodes and have
a look at the mark Zehnder
interferometer explanation that I gave
so you end up with this one event so to
speak causing this differentiation into
four different kinds okay I'll just
let's go back to the book David writes
quote our fictional theory has not
provided an enough structure in its
multiverse to give meaning to half the
universes but the real quantum theory
does as I explained in Chapter eight the
method that a theory provides for giving
a meaning to proportions and averages
for infinite sets is called a measure a
familiar example is that classical
physics assigns lengths to infinite sets
of points arranged in a line let us
suppose that our theory provides a
measure for universes now we are allowed
story lines such as the following in the
universes in which the couple married
they spend their honeymoon on a human
colonized planet that the spaceship is
visiting as they are teleporting back up
the voltage surge in half those
universes causes someone's electronic
notepad to play a voice message
suggesting that one of the newlyweds has
already been unfaithful
this sets off a chain of events that
ends in divorce so now our original
collection of fungible universes
contains three different histories in
one comprising half the original set of
universes the couple in question are
still single in the second comprising a
quarter of the original set by married
and in
third comprising the remaining quarter
they divorced that's the three histories
to not occupy equal proportions of the
multiverse there are twice as many
universes in which the couple never
married as there are in the universes in
which they are divorced pours down my
reflection mark Zehnder interferometer
again similar kind of number of breakup
proportions okay it's 1/2 1/4 1/4 back
to the book David Rives quotes now
suppose that the scientists on the
starship know about the multiverse and
understand the physics of the
transporter though note that we have not
yet given them any way of discovering
those things then they know that when
they're on the transporter an infinite
number of fungible instances of
themselves all sharing the same history
are doing so at the same time they know
that a voltage surge will occur in half
the universes in that history which
means that it will split into two
histories of equal measure hence they
know that if they use the voltmeter
capable of detecting the surge half of
the instances of themselves are going to
find that it has recorded one and the
other half are not but they also know
that it is meanings to ask not merely
impossible to know which event they will
experience consequently they can make
two closely related predictions one is
that despite the perfect determinism of
everything that's happening nothing can
reliably predict for them whether the
voltmeter will detect a surge the other
prediction is simply the voltmeter will
record a surge with probability 1/2
thus the outcomes of such experiments
are subjectively random from the
perspective of any observer even though
everything that is happening is
completely determined objectively this
is also the origin of quantum mechanical
randomness and probability in real
physics it is due to the measure that
the theory provides for the multiverse
which is in turn due to what kinds of
physical processes the theory allows and
forbids notice that when a random
outcome in this sense is about to happen
it is a situation of diversity within
fungibility that the diversity is in the
variable one outcome they are going to
see the logic of the situation is the
same as in cases like that of the bank
account are discussed above except that
this time the fungible entities are
people they are fungible yet ha
of them are going to see the surge and
the other half not in practice they
could test this prediction by doing the
experiment many times every formula
purporting to predict the sequence of
outcomes will eventually fail that test
the unpredictability and in the
overwhelming majority of universes and
histories the search will happen
approximately half the time that tests
the predicted value of the probability
only a tiny proportion of the instances
of the observers will see anything
different paused am i reflection so
there's a hint at the testability of the
multiverse and against classical Roth's
okay so classical physics says the same
thing can happen over and over again
this is classically what science says
the whole point of repeating your
experiment to find out whether or not
it's reliable is to see whether you get
the same outcome each time well here if
we repeat the experiment we should find
that we won't get the same result every
single time if there's a situation in
which it's 50/50 then we should get
different results every single time not
every single time we should
approximately up we should approach the
50/50
limit okay so just my reflection here
I'm going to skip another substantial
part here and David talks about how the
sphere of differentiation as it spreads
out it too can cause differentiation in
in probabilistic ways okay or why is
that subjectively random and so although
the first thing that happened was this
quantum event this voltage surge and the
spilling of coffee
the wave of differentiation that spreads
out can then differentiate at each each
time a thing could have happened one way
or the other or in many different ways
all the possible outcomes happen and so
that causes quote from the book the
number of histories continues to
increase exponentially and soon there
are so many variations on events that
several significant changes have been
caused somewhere
in the multiversal diversity of the
starship so in the total number of such
use so the total number of such
histories increases exponentially too
even though they continue to constitute
only a small proportion of all histories
that are present soon after that in an
even smaller but still exponentially
growing number of histories and Kenny
chains of accidents and unlikely
coincidences will have come to dominate
events I put those terms in quotation
marks because those events namely the
accidents and the unlikely coincidences
those events are not in the least
accidental they've all happened
inevitably according to deterministic
laws of physics
all of them are caused by the
transporter and David's pausing they're
just my reflection and this is where I
think I'll end it today because I'm will
get to this David does right about this
ah no not in these words we when I was
learning about the multiverse version
David introduced me to so-called Harry
Potter universes so I'll give you my my
take on what Harry Potter universe are
like they kind of follow this idea here
because you can have these chains of
extremely unlikely events in a very
small measure of universes but still you
know exponentially increasing in number
what could happen is this okay that
there could be literally a universe in
which you have some teenager speckled
boy who carries a wooden stick and each
time he does this with the wooden stick
and says abracadabra a spark comes out
of the wooden stick that's perfectly
consistent with the laws of physics
electrons can gain enough energy to come
out of wooden sticks they can just they
can just happen right
you know the quantum theory says things
very bizarre like look here here's his
here's a simpler example right
it is I have a glass of water now
interesting thing about water is that a
you know sea-level it has a boiling
point of a hundred degrees Celsius so if
you if we heat this water on a stove
then it 100 degrees Celsius starts to
bubble away and it will all disappear if
you continue to boil it that's not
surprising so if water has a boiling
point of 100 degrees Celsius an
interesting question is why should it
evaporate right now if I leave this here
for long enough at a mere temperature in
this room right now of about 23 degrees
Celsius eventually after a long enough
time it will all evaporate away but it's
not boiling so how does a Fabares ssin
work because evaporation can happen at
any temperature the solution to that is
that the 32 23 degrees Celsius water
that's in here let's say that's the
average temperature is a measure of the
average kinetic energy roughly speaking
of the particles of water in here the
h2o molecules an average means that some
of them have much less energy than 23
degrees Celsius and some of them have
energy much higher than 23 degrees
Celsius some of them have a temperature
effectively have a emotion that
corresponds to a temperature above
boiling point and so those ones boil
away and so as they boil away in fact it
causes the temperature to go down
because you're losing the highest energy
ones but you can't possibly take away
all the high energy ones because
although the average might go lower and
lower it's still getting it's getting
heat from the environment as well so
this is how evaporation in general works
now it is consistent with the laws of
physics that because it's an average it
could just happen that all of the
particles they like why does any one
particle have a temperature or a motion
that corresponds to a temperature above
100 degrees Celsius why should any one
of them have that by chance could more
than the average have a temperature of
above 100 degrees Celsius
yes could all of them according to what
we know about physics could all of them
just by chance
have a temperature above hundred degrees
Celsius yes exceedingly unlikely
exceedingly unlikely you would never
expect I would never expect to be
drinking this and suddenly to be scolded
and burnt because the the the proportion
of universes in which that happens is so
exceedingly small but that's that's the
principle right the principle is that
randomly all of the molecules in this
glass of water could extremely
exceedingly rarely become start moving
so fast that the entire glass of water
here boils once I got to do with Harry
Potter universes well the boy in some
universe somewhere that the speckled boy
with these wand wand I say wand with
ease stick goes abracadabra and a spark
comes out that's exceedingly unlikely
but it could happen it could happen once
according to quantum theory it could
continue to happen it's not the fact
that the spark is caused by the boy
doing this or saying abracadabra
uttering the magic words there's no
causal effect between those things it's
perfectly consistent with the laws of it
it just happens by chance that these
electrons go flying out of the end of
the stick but in his head and all people
around him they think well Harry Potter
has the ability to actually do magic
perhaps he keeps on doing this
throughout his entire life and every
time he does that the spark comes out
and so he apparently is a wizard who is
able to have lightning come from his
wand and so he appears to be a wizard
but he only appears to be a wizard it
only appears to be the case that magic
works magic doesn't actually work and in
fact if there is a universe in which and
there is where a boy has gone
abracadabra in the spark has come down
the overall in majority of universes
then our such that the second time he
does it it would never happen again
it won't happen or the third time of
time or the millionth time he does it
it's just not going to happen again but
in some universes it will happen once in
a lesser number of universes it happens
twice in a lesser still number of
universes happens three times you get my
point there will be some exceedingly
small number of universes where every
time he does it it works what I say
works it appears to work or that event
happens the spark comes out and so we
termed these universes such universes
Harry Potter universes we're exceedingly
rare events happen and the people in
those universes could concoct a story
about how magic works and so there are
places as David will explain in the part
that I'll read next time where bizarre
fiction appears to be true story in fact
it in certain bizarre types of fiction
are true but not that doesn't mean that
the things are causal there so this has
to do with whether or not the knowledge
they have there is valid and this goes
deep into the idea of information flow
so there we've got a whole bunch of
chance coincidences okay that the saying
of the abracadabra the spark flying out
of the stick and therefore people
referring to this the stickers a wand
and to the spark as magic and Harry
Potter in that universe as a wizard even
though the stick is just a stick the
spark is just a spark it's not magical
lightning Harry Potter is just a kid
with spectacles he's not a wizard but
people in those universes they don't
know because it's just been freak
coincidences but that's an exceedingly
small number of universes one would
expect a number of universes smaller
than the number of universes in which
suddenly all of the water in all of the
oceans on planet Earth has boiled away
instantly it's happened somewhere in the
multiverse but the measure of universe
is where that's happened is so tiny as
to not really be of anything other than
purely academic interest okay so more on
that next time I hope this one was
enjoyable until next time see you bye
[Music]
[Applause]